---
layout: post
title: Bringing agents into a life sciences research lab
description: ...
summary: ...
published: false
---

2026 is 30% over. It is safe to say that 2026 is the year of Agents.

[Claude Code] brought the CLI back into many people's live; some for the first time. Then came [Codex]. But nothing made waves like [OpenClaw]. Created by [Peter] on [Nov. X 2025], by February 2026 it had surpassed [Linux] and [Vercel] in GitHub stars (today it sits at ~365k★). This is my experience with agents over the past year, how I use them for research, and the exciting future ahead for what AI will enable in research.

I've been coding for a long time, and i love trying new things, new tools. Naturally, with every new LLM model that came out I would always try them and just get frustrated with the quality. There were magic moments when I wrote a comment block describing a function and pressed →tab to get a one-shot version that actually worked, kinda sucked, but worked. It was mostly fun, but it never became a regular tool I relied on.

That (almost) changed in July 2025.

Anthropic released Opus 4 and for the first time I felt like it was starting to become good enough at specific coding tasks. I found myself going back to Claude Code not just for hobby projects, but now also for some lab work. I am a PhD candidate in the [Emonet Lab]. I study neuroscience; olfactory navigation in fruit flies. Flies smell things, flies fly (walk) towards odor source, flies find food and mates. They are tiny but mighty and have increadibly complex behaviors, and a brain we can study. So that's what I do.

The first few use cases were similar to most people used AI chatbots so far: attach a PDF of some paper, ask it to review, find relevant citations to read, key points for each figure, etc. But I wanted more, I wanted it to already know things so I could just ask about them; and I need to be able to trust the answers, factual and with real sources, no hallucinations. I am sure everyone that has worked in lab has wanted a version of this. I had been calling it [memex], after [Vannevar Bush's concept] of a personal knowledge management system that can store and link information in a way that mimics human memory. It lived in my lab dropbox. Everyone had access to it, they just didn't know. Karpathy recently posted about the idea of a creating an [LLM wiki], and brought up the memex reference. He articulated the premise very well, and I recommend reading it; I certainly incorporated some ideas into my workflow.

Back to July 2025. I started building a (small) memex.

Just a bunch of papers in a folder, my notes about the papers, and asking Claude to link information and search the web for more things to read. It was... okay. I didn't get any new insights into our work or made any breakthroughs with it, but the quality of the answers improved greatly just because it now had some foundational knowledge to start from. I kept expanding the memex and come September Sonnet 4.5 was released. I had it rereview all my papers and update the memex, the results were clearly better. It was also much better at identifying gaps and connecting different research topics. This was the first time where I switched from mostly asking it to do things to asking it **about** things.

My usage kept increasing and increasing. Opus 4.5 in November was another big jump in quality, so much so that I decided to hack together a Slack bot that just routed messages to Claude code. I was now relying on it for finding papers to cite when I needed references for something I was writing about; finding fly lines that I needed but couldn't remember which paper had used them; it was also with Opus 4.5 that I started experimenting more with using it for data analysis.

In the span of months, Opus 4 in July → 4.5 in November, what seemed impossible before started looking like it was around the corner.

Then came GPT-5.2 in early December. I switched from Claude to Codex. I missed Opus writing style, it felt more human, but GPT-5.2 was so good at doing things. It was a bit slower, but it got things done in fewer iterations. The writing was a bit more robotic, but for summirizing papers and populating the memex, that did not really matter. I just wanted accurate information.

Around that same time, I saw a post by Peter on twitter about what is now [OpenClaw]. A personal AI agent that you can talk to from anywhere, and can do anything you can do on your computer. Sign me up. I installed it and used it with Telegram as a way to talk to my agent. By the first week of January all I talked about was pinguini (my OpenClaw agent); my girlfriend was not happy when she first got a text message from pinguini, but they became friends eventually. The utility became obvious, and so acceptance followed.

I then decided to retire my hacky Slack bot that routed messages to Claude and to use OpenClaw instead. OpenClaw agents have **bootstrap** files: SOUL.md, IDENTITY.md, MEMORY.md. The agent had personality, sass, it remebered things. It really was **personal**. Everything made sense, everything clicked. I was really hooked. I went back to using Opus for the agent. It was more conversational and better with jokes.

While the Agent ran on Opus, I was using GPT 5.2 (5.2-Codex → 5.3 → 5.4 → 5.5) for **everything**. It got increasingly better at writing code, understanding complex tasks and executing on them. I was now using it to review papers, fully rewrite my memex, identify research gaps, audit my analysis codes, standardize plotting functions.

Then I gave it direct access to data. I was blown away. Time and time again it would arrive at the same conclusions I did and perform the same analysis with me trying as hard as possible to not prompt it into any direction; just trying to get it to reach conclusions based on the data itself and any knowledge it could extract from the memex. It was now describing my whole research project and replicating PhD level reasoning and analysis. I am not special or super smart, but at least compared to myself, the model was doing pretty damn well.

I really wanted to share this with people but wasn't sure what kind of reaction I would get. So around March I decided that instead of just opening up the memex to everyone, I would first just let them talk to an agent as a group and get used to the idea. I made an agent that says "bro" every other sentence, and its sole task was build a dossier about everyone in the lab and every interaction it had with anyone to build roast material; then when people least expected, drop a little 5 word roast when replying to something that would land in a way that just made people laugh. Some times it was just bad, but a lot of times it was good, and funny. People liked it. People got used to the idea of talking to agents in the lab context.

It was time for the memex.

I finally created a #wiki slack channel where people could interact with my entire knowledgebase. I had been refining the memex over the past 10 months. It was built and rebuilt many times over. The [ship of theseus] all over again. It was now in a shape where consuming it with an agent just felt like magic. It can connect incredibly complex ideas across papers, even papers from seemingly distant domains, and come up with genuinly good research questions. Giving it access to resources that are relevant to my field like [FlyBase], [FlyLight], connectomes like the [hemibrain] and [FlyWire] means I can just ask my agent for genetic lines for imaging antennal lobe projection neurons while optogenetically activating olfactory neurons and silencing some other neurona population, and it will find the lines and come up with the plan for crossing them together. Huge amount of time saved. You can ask "how many synapses does Or42b ORNs make onto DM1 PNs?" and it will go into the connectome and find that information. You can ask "which lines label EPG neurons?" and it will come back with the answer, and you can follow up with "show me the expression for that line" and it will pull up images so you can verify if the line has targeted expression. The examples go on. It's amazing! And it's just the start. I am really excited about the future of science and how AI will enable us to do things we could not do before, and to do things much faster than we could before. Or maybe at the same speed, but with a bit more sleep.

It also proved itself increadibly useful as a teaching tool. Onboarding people and identifying classic and key papers to read first. Creating a timeline of papers for a specific topic. Explaining basic fly genetics. Performing connectomics analysis. It is like having a senior grad student that can help you with anything, and is always available.

As with code generation, AI generated slop is a problem. "Luckily", a lot of code written in research labs is already pretty low quality. Mostly because people in life sciences do not usually have a background in coding. Most of the analysis is also standardized and rarely requires anything fancy or out of the ordinary, unless you are actually researching novel methods. Life sciences research is the perfect place for AI to step in and be broadly used; maybe it just needs better UX, or maybe it just needs a memex!

Neuroscience research specifically is still and probably will be still very much performed by humans. Automating behavioral experiments is probably at the extreme end of what the hardest reserch tasks to do. Maybe automating fly surgery and imaging is not that far away; we can already do [surgery using lasers]. It is true that we can also automate [some types of behavior experiments]. I would love to be wrong, but I don't see research being largerly automated any time soon. However, however! A memex for everyone? That has to be coming. People must be working on it? People must've been working on personal AI agents, but nothing came meaningful came out until OpenClaw. Maybe if labs start building their own versions of a memex, then larger efforts towards a global infrastructure may happen faster.

I am sharing the skeleton of how I built my memex. I hope it inspires some graduate student or postdoc in some lab to build one for their lab too. You can change everything about it; the principle is just building a wiki and having an interactive agent that consumes it. How you build it is entirely up to you. As for my memex, I am sure it will change in a few months when a new model comes out. I will keep updating it. Rebuilding it. What is exciting is that it will just get better, and it is already amazing.

But what about hallucinations? Use frontier models! They are better and better and dealing with prompt injection. With OpenClaw you can also tune how the agent behaves extremely well. You can see my sample [SOUL.md], and the agent always bases their responses using facts from the wiki or external resources, but it must have sources. Saying "I don't know" is encouraged.

What about security? Don't expose your agent online and limit it's interaction with only people you trust. That doesn't even mean your entire lab. Maybe limit it to only interact with people in the slack channel, and don't allow DMs initially. A lot of fear comes from not understanding. Use it and you will quickly understand how agents work and **what** works when setting them up. You can easily sandbox it into an environment where it can't do anything but read the wiki, if that is what you want.

What about costs? Yes, tokens are not cheap. I love Opus personality for agents, but it is extremely expensive as of April 2026. Codex right now is the better choice, both in terms of performance and cost. Build your memex using it. Use Opus for interacting with your agent, if you can. I also hope that local models will soon be able to perform agentic workflows realiably and with high quality. We are getting there. MiniMax, Kimi, Gemma, DeepSeek are often releasing new models and they keep getting better.
